Gladiator, starring Russell Crowe as a disgraced
Roman general and Joaquin Phoenix playing
the caeser Commodus, son of Marcus Aurelius’.
It is an epic historical film that captures a very
Shakespearean sense of drama and atmosphere,
and quite like Shakespeare takes a few artistic liberties with the source material, and historical facts
thus there are a few anachronisms, but that shouldn't take away from the enjoyment of the film.
But in terms of cinematic legacy, Gladiator is a
love letter to classic ‘sword-and-sandal’
films of yesteryear; such as Spartacus, Ben-Hurr, Clash of the Titans, and Quo Vadis.
Ave Imperator!
Gird your loins, we fight in the Arena!
In AD 180, Hispano-Roman General Maximus Decimus
Meridius intends to return to his home after
he leads the Roman army to victory against
the Germanic tribes near Vindobona on the
Limes Germanicus.
Emperor Marcus Aurelius tells Maximus that
his own son, Commodus, is unfit to succeed
and that he wishes Maximus to succeed him,
as regent, to help save Rome from corruption.
Commodus murders his father when he is told
about the plan.
Commodus announces he is the new Emperor,
asks Maximus for his loyalty, and the general
refuses.
Maximus is arrested by guards and is told
that he will die at dawn and meet his family
in the afterlife, but he kills his captors
and rides for his home near Trujillo.
He finds it burning and his family murdered.
Maximus buries his wife and son; then collapses.
He is found by slavers who take him to the
Roman province of Zucchabar, where he is sold
to a gladiator trainer named Proximo.
Although reluctant at first, Maximus fights
in local tournaments and make friends with
two other gladiators: Juba, a Numidian; and
Hagen, a German.
His military skills help him win matches and
gain recognition from other gladiators and
the crowd.
Proximo reveals that his own past has shown
him that to be a good killer is not enough;
a good gladiator is one who can "win the crowd".
Proximo takes his gladiators to fight in Rome's
Colosseum, because Commodus has organized
150 days of games.
Disguised by a masked helmet, Maximus debuts
in gladiatorial combat in the Colosseum as
a Carthaginian in a re-enactment of the Battle
of Zama, where the Cartaginians are supposed
to be massacred by gladiators playing the
legionnaires of Scipio Africanus; but Maximus
leads his side to victory.
Commodus is pleased by the surprising outcome
and enters the Colosseum to offer his congratulations.
Maximus cannot kill Commodus because Commodus's
nephew, Lucilla's son, whom Maximus has befriended,
accompanies him.
Commodus orders the disguised Maximus, as
leader of the gladiators, to show himself
and give his name, which leads to Maximus
revealing himself and declaring vengeance.
The Emperor is compelled by the crowd to let
the gladiators live, and the Praetorian Guard
is held back from striking them down.
Maximus's next fight is a victory against
a legendary undefeated gladiator.
Commodus has ordered that the loser should
die; but Maximus spares his opponent's life,
and he is called "Maximus the Merciful" by
the crowd.
Angered at this outcome, Commodus taunts Maximus
about his family's deaths, but Maximus turns
and walks away—another defiant act that
the emperor has to endure.
Maximus discovers from Cicero, his ex-orderly,
that his former legions remain loyal.
Lucilla, Commodus' sister; Gracchus, an influential
senator; and Maximus meet secretly.
Maximus will escape Rome, join his soldiers,
topple Commodus by force, and hand power back
to the Roman Senate.
Commodus learns of the plot by threatening
Lucilla, and has the Praetorian Guard arrest
Gracchus and attack the gladiators' barracks.
Proximo and his men (including Hagen) sacrifice
themselves to enable Maximus to escape.
Maximus is captured at the rendezvous with
Cicero, where Cicero is killed.
Commodus challenges Maximus to a duel.
He stabs Maximus before the match to gain
an advantage.
Maximus disarms Commodus, whom the Praetorian
Guard refuse to aid.
The emperor feigns being disarmed then produces
a hidden knife.
Maximus drives the blade into Commodus's throat
and then grows weak.
Before he dies he asks for political reforms,
for his gladiator allies to be freed, and
for Senator Gracchus to be reinstated.
He then succumbs to his wound.
While the dead Commodus is left abandoned
on the dirt floor of the arena, Maximus's
friends and allies solemnly lift Maximus up
and honor him as "a soldier of Rome", at Lucilla's
behest.
The crowd stands in respect as Maximus is
carried out to be given an honorable funeral.
Juba visits the Colosseum at night and buries
the figurines of Maximus' wife and son at
the spot where he died.
Juba says he is to return to his own family
and promises to see Maximus again, "but not
yet".